=== PAGE 1 ===
 
  APT or “AIPT”? The Surp
University of Melbourne Shikun Ke
Yale School of Management Bryan Kelly
Yale School of Management, AQR Capital Management, and NBER 
 Semyon Malamud
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Swiss Finance Institute, and  
CEPR Swiss Finance Institu


=== PAGE 2 ===
APT or “AIPT”? The Surprising Dominance of Large
Factor Models
Antoine Didisheim, Shikun Ke, Bryan Kelly, and Semyon Malamud∗
July 22, 2025
Abstract
We introduce artificial intelligence pricing theory (AIPT). In contrast with the APT’s
foundational assumption of a low dimensional factor structure in returns, the AIPT
conjectures that returns are driven by a large number of factors. We first verify this
conjecture empirically and show that complex nonlinear models with an exorbitant
number of factors (many more than the number of training observations or base assets)
are far more successful in describing the out-of-sample behavior of asset returns than
simpler benchmark models.
Economically, we show that complex models are more
than twice as sensitive to long-run macroeconomic activity than simpler benchmarks.
Finally, we theoretically characterize the behavior of large factor pricing models, from
which we show that the AIPT’s “many factors” conjecture faithfully explains our
empirical findings, while the APT’s “few factors” conjecture is contradicted by the
data.
Keywords: Machine learning, asset pricing, factor model, stochastic discount factor
(SDF), pricing error, cross-section of returns, portfolio choice
JEL: C3, C58, C61, G11, G12, G14
∗A previously circulated version of this article was titled “Complexity in Factor Pricing Models.” Antoine
Didisheim is at the University of Melbourne. Shikun Ke is at Yale School of Management. Bryan Kelly
is at Yale School of Management, AQR Capital Management, and NBER; www.bryankellyacademic.org.
Semyon Malamud is at Swiss Finance Institute, EPFL, and CEPR, and is a consultant to AQR. We are
grateful for helpful comments from Federico Baldi-Lanfranchi, John Campbell, Mike Chernov, Xavier Gabaix,
Martin Lettau, Stefan Nagel, Mohammad Pourmohammadi, Seth Pruitt, Mirela Sandulescu, Paul Schneider,
Fabio Trojani, Neng Wang, and participants at many seminars and conferences. Semyon Malamud gratefully
acknowledges the financial support of the Swiss Finance Institute and the Swiss National Science Foundation,
Grant 100018 192692. AQR Capital Management is a global investment management firm that may or may
not apply similar investment techniques or methods of analysis as described herein. The views expressed
here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of AQR.


=== PAGE 3 ===
1
Introduction
Ross’s (1976) APT conjectures that a small number of common factors govern the joint
variation of returns.
This premise, combined with no-arbitrage arguments, delivers the
prediction that assets’ expected returns are determined by exposures to a few common
factors. Most empirical investigations of the risk-return tradeoff in the past fifty years have
occurred within the confines of the APT’s assumption—small linear factor models.
In this paper, we consider a different conjecture: that asset pricing models with an
exorbitant number of factors are better suited to describe the behavior of asset returns. Our
conjecture is rooted in the burgeoning theory of artificial intelligence, which suggests that
“complex” statistical models, those with many more parameters (P) than available training
observations (T), tend to achieve better out-of-sample success than smaller models.1 Given
its origins, we refer to this conjecture as artificial intelligence pricing theory, or AIPT, to
contrast it with the parsimony assumption at the heart of the APT.
One reason for the APT’s position as a cornerstone of empirical asset pricing is the
convenience of working with small linear factor models.
The most obvious convenience
stems from the tractability of estimating small models. More subtle is the convenience of
comparing small models. The APT sets up conditions necessary for comparing models based
on in-sample test statistics (namely, that the number of parameters is small compared to the
number of training observations). Large factor models, on the other hand, are admittedly
inconvenient. With so many parameters, they can be costly to train, and due to their high
1See, among others, Hastie et al. (2019), Bartlett et al. (2020), and Kelly et al. (2024b). Following these
papers, we define model complexity as the ratio of factor dimension to the number of training observations
c = P/T. Our theoretical derivations rely crucially on the ratio c, hence our focus on this definition of
complexity. The statistics literature proposes and analyzes other measures of model complexity as well, each
capturing somewhat different qualities. As noted by Bartlett et al. (2020): “The classical perspective in
statistical learning theory is that there should be a tradeoff between the fit to the training data and the
complexity of the prediction rule. Whether complexity is measured in terms of the number of parameters,
the number of nonzero parameters in a high-dimensional setting, the number of neighbors averaged in a
nearest neighbor estimator, the scale of an estimate in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, or the bandwidth
of a kernel smoother, this tradeoff has been ubiquitous in statistical learning theory.”
2


=== PAGE 4 ===
statistical complexity, standard in-sample asset pricing tests are not applicable. Instead,
they require out-of-sample model performance comparisons.
We show that, despite their inconveniences, large factor models are far better at pricing
assets than the standard low-dimensional factor models in the literature. In the first half
of this paper, we present extensive empirical evidence that challenges the APT parsimony
conjecture and favors the complexity conjecture of AIPT. In the second half of the paper
we develop a statistical theory that characterizes the behavior of complex factor models and
rationalizes their surprising dominance in pricing assets.
1.1
Empirical Behavior of Large Factor Models
Our central empirical finding is that the out-of-sample performance of factor pricing models
is increasing in the number of factors. We focus on two metrics of model performance— the
Sharpe ratio of the tangency portfolio among factors and the magnitude of pricing errors
among test assets.
Our analysis gradually increases the number of factors while holding the underlying
information set fixed.
The information set includes 130 well-known characteristics that
predict the cross-section of US stocks.
To vary the number of pricing factors, we use a
neural network to generate new stock characteristics—up to hundreds of thousands—that are
nonlinear transformations of the original 130 variables. For each nonlinear characteristic, we
build the corresponding factor (using a standard characteristic-managed portfolio approach).
Training the factor model amounts to building the stochastic discount factor (SDF) as the
tangency portfolio of factors (using ridge shrinkage where applicable). We then track the
complex SDF’s performance out-of-sample, presenting our main empirical results in the
form of “VoC curves” (Kelly et al., 2024b, KMZ henceforth) that plot performance as a
function of the number of factors. These curves document a “virtue of complexity” in factor
pricing models, with out-of-sample Sharpe ratios increasing and pricing errors decreasing
3


=== PAGE 5 ===
as we expand the number of factors. The complex SDF performs well even when—in fact,
especially when—P far exceeds T.
Large factor models outperform well-known, low-dimensional factor models from the
literature by a wide margin.
For example, the largest model we consider (with 360,000
factors, or a complexity ratio of 1,000 given our 360-month rolling training window) reduces
pricing errors by 54.8% relative to the six-factor Fama and French (2015) model (including
momentum) and by 50.4% relative to the five-factor Hou et al. (2021) model. Meanwhile,
our largest factor model produces an out-of-sample tangency Sharpe ratio of 3.7, compared
to 0.8 and 1.2 for the aforementioned benchmarks, respectively.2
Improvements in SDF measurement achieved by large factor models offer a window into
the economic nature of the unobservable “true” SDF. We argue that the higher an SDF’s out-
of-sample Sharpe ratio, the better it reflects the drivers of investors’ intertemporal marginal
rate of substitution, and thus the better it should reflect expectations of future economic
conditions. In other words, portfolio efficiency and informational efficiency go hand-in-hand.
We estimate a macroeconomic vector autoregression and find that the complex SDF is an
unusually strong forecaster of macroeconomic conditions as far as three years into the future.
For example, a positive one standard deviation annual return to the complex SDF predicts a
roughly 3% rise in industrial production over three years and a reduction in macroeconomic
uncertainty of about 7.5% over two years. A positive SDF return also predict significant
increases in employment, consumption, consumer sentiment, and housing over horizons of
up to three years, and it predicts a decrease in credit spreads and inflation.
The asset pricing benefits of complexity and nonlinearity accrue even when the condition-
ing information set is relatively small. For example, we construct a “nonlinear Fama-French
model” using a large set of nonlinear factors derived from only five characteristics: size, value,
investment, profitability, and momentum, rather than the full set of 130 characteristics in our
main analysis. The added complexity more than doubles the out-of-sample tangency Sharpe
2We study a number of additional benchmark models as well.
4


=== PAGE 6 ===
ratio relative to the baseline Fama-French model.
The same result obtains for complex
nonlinear versions of other benchmark models in the literature.
The insights of Kozak et al. (2020) suggest that a successful asset pricing model may not
require many factors because the returns of most anomaly factors are adequately explained
by a small number of their principal components. This begs the question: Can our complex
pricing model be compressed to achieve similar performance with potentially many fewer
parameters?
Evidently, the answer is no.
We consider replacing the large number of
factors in our complex model with a smaller number of their principal components and
find that dimension reduction significantly impairs out-of-sample performance relative to
the full complex model.
Lastly, we conduct a variety of robustness analyses that consider different input char-
acteristics, various subsets of the stock universe, different training windows, and so forth.
Every robustness test reinforces our main findings. In summary, we establish the empirical
fact that large factor models are better at pricing assets than existing parsimonious models.
1.2
Theoretical Findings
In order to understand our empirical findings, we develop a statistical theory of large factor
pricing models. Consider the following interpretation of a large factor model from the asset
pricing theory perspective of an SDF. A conditional SDF can be represented as a tradable
portfolio of risky assets:
Mt+1 = 1 −w(Zt)′Rt+1.
(1)
Rt+1 contains excess returns of risky assets, and w(Zt) are the SDF’s weights on those
assets. The weights are determined by variables Zt that span the time t information set.
Without further guidance about the functional form of w, a machine learning-based empirical
approach would approximate the SDF with a nonparametric model such as a shallow neural
5


=== PAGE 7 ===
network: w(Zt) ≈PP
p=1 λpSp(Zt), where each Sp(Zt) is some nonlinear basis function of Zt.
Thus, a neural network SDF delivers a linear factor pricing model,
Mt+1 ≈1 −
X
p
λpFp,t+1,
(2)
where each “factor” Fp,t+1 is a characteristic-managed portfolio that uses the transformed
“characteristics” Sp(Zt) as portfolio weights, and λ = (λ1, ..., λP) are parameters to be
estimated.
This formulation captures the tension in machine learning asset pricing models. On the
one hand, the more terms in the nonparametric representation of w (and thus the larger
the number of factors), the better the model can approximate the true SDF. But as we
improve the approximation, we simultaneously increase the number of parameters that must
be estimated, so when P becomes large, the estimated model may be unstable and suffer
out-of-sample. Our theory makes it possible to understand (and quantitatively characterize)
this cost/benefit tradeoff in large factor models. This is non-trivial and requires our novel
random matrix theory (RMT) results that allow us to tackle the “three infinities” problem
(when the number of assets, observations, and parameters are simultaneously large).3
On the cost side of the tradeoff is a phenomenon we refer to as “limits to learning.”
In low complexity settings—with many more observations than parameters to estimate—
the law of large numbers kicks in, and appropriate estimators can recover the true model.4
Traditional econometric theory deals with estimator behavior in this data-rich environment.
By contrast, in high-complexity settings, the number of factors is large relative to the number
of observations.
Thus, the law of large numbers breaks down.
Even correctly specified
estimators fail to converge on the true model because there is not enough data to go around.
The first key aspect of our theory is an explicit characterization of the limits to the learning
3Established RMT results (e.g., those from Hastie et al., 2019) are insufficient in our context.
4I.e., if the model is correctly specified. If the model is mis-specified, estimators recover the nearest
“pseudo-true” parameters (e.g. White, 1996).
6


=== PAGE 8 ===
effect. We prove that data limitations impose an unavoidable implicit shrinkage of the model,
which depresses the model’s expressive power. Complexity induces bias through its implicit
shrinkage. But on the benefit side of the tradeoff, complexity also reduces specification bias.
More factors lead to a more accurate approximation of the true SDF. Our main theoretical
result shows that which effect dominates depends on the eigenvalue distribution of the factors.
When there is a concentrated eigenvalue distribution and thus a few dominant factors, asset
pricing model performance tops out after adding only a few factors, and there is no virtue
of complexity—a counterfactual prediction in light of our empirical findings.
However, when the underlying factor structure is not too concentrated—that is, when the
data-generating process aligns with the AIPT conjecture—a virtue of complexity emerges
that closely mimics the patterns we find in the data. Our theory rationalizes our surprising
empirical facts, demonstrating that even if arbitrage is absent and an SDF exists, it is
possible to continually find new empirical “risk” factors that are unpriced by others and that
adding these factors to the pricing model continually improves its out-of-sample performance.
The theory also helps rationalize the prominence of “anomaly” portfolios in empirical asset
pricing. The abundance of anomalies (the so-called “factor zoo”) is not a puzzle to be solved
or evidence of a corrupt research process.5 Instead, it is the theoretically expected outcome
in a complex asset pricing environment because data limitations hamper our ability to learn
the true nature of markets. In fact, our theory argues that the extant factor zoo is too small
and that an SDF model can be beneficially expanded to incorporate a teeming Noah’s ark
of factors by transforming raw asset characteristics into a wide variety of nonlinear signals
(buttressed by appropriate shrinkage). Such a large factor set improves the out-of-sample
SDF Sharpe ratio and reduces out-of-sample pricing errors.
5Jensen et al. (2023) reach a similar conclusion based on the rationale that the risk-return trade-off is
difficult to measure and complexity manifests as an inability to find a single silver-bullet characteristic that
pins down expected returns. Instead, researchers gradually expand and refine the set of noisy signals and
conclude “a more positive take on the factor zoo is not as a collective exercise in data mining and false
discovery, but rather as a natural outcome of a decentralized effort in which researchers make contributions
that are correlated with, but incrementally improve on, the body of knowledge.”
7


=== PAGE 9 ===
1.3
Literature Review
This paper is related to an emergent literature that shows machine learning asset pricing
models achieve higher out-of-sample Sharpe ratios and smaller pricing errors than their
parsimonious predecessors. Examples include Kozak et al. (2020), Gu et al. (2020a), Chen
et al. (2023), Bryzgalova et al. (2020), Cong et al. (2022), Fan et al. (2022) and Preite
et al. (2022), among others.
It also relates to machine learning methods for analyzing
factor models, including Connor et al. (2012), Fan et al. (2016), Kelly et al. (2020), Lettau
and Pelger (2020), Giglio and Xiu (2021), Giglio et al. (2022), and He et al. (2023) (see
Kelly and Xiu (2023) and Rapach and Zhou (2020) for more complete survey treatments of
these topics). We extend this literature with detailed documentation of the counterintuitive
phenomenon that out-of-sample asset pricing model performance appears to improve with
ever richer model specifications.
An understanding of this surprising empirical phenomenon is only beginning to take
shape.
KMZ theoretically analyze machine learning models for return prediction.
We
extend this work in a number of ways, including reorienting the statistical objective around
minimizing pricing errors and maximizing SDF Sharpe ratios, and by moving from a single
asset to a cross-section of assets.6 Together with Martin and Nagel (2021), Da et al. (2022),
Fan et al. (2022), and KMZ, our paper belongs to an emergent literature analyzing “limits to
learning” in high-dimensional asset pricing models. Our paper also relates to the theoretical
6From a technical standpoint, we overcome a number of new theoretical hurdles relative to KMZ. In time
series regressions of KMZ, the random matrix behavior of time series signal covariances dictates the market
timing strategies. In the panel problem, behavior is determined not just by time series covariances but also by
the covariance of signals across assets. While standard random matrix theory in KMZ requires dealing with
double limits (number of observations and number of parameters), our analysis requires the development
of a non-trivial theoretical extension to deal with a third limiting dimension—the number of base assets.
This contrasts with recent results of Martin and Nagel (2021), who lack the time dimension and assume
that all stock characteristics are constant. Such an assumption implies that factors (characteristics-managed
portfolios) are, in fact, static portfolios of stocks. In particular, the number of factors in their setting is
always smaller than the number of stocks. Importantly, we also remove the equal ex-ante predictive power
assumption of KMZ and allow for a generic distribution of risk premia across factors.
8


=== PAGE 10 ===
machine learning literature on topics surrounding “double descent” and “benign overfit” (e.g.
Spigler et al., 2019; Hastie et al., 2019; Belkin et al., 2020; Bartlett et al., 2020).
A related empirical literature analyzes the association between asset returns and future
macroeconomic conditions. Parker and Julliard (2005) and Croce et al. (2023) show that
stock returns covary with future consumption growth.7 Bryzgalova et al. (Forthcoming) and
Dew-Becker and Giglio (2016) use returns to identify the role of long-lived consumption risks
for pricing assets. Backus et al. (2007) show that equity returns lead GDP growth by a few
quarters. We add to this literature in a number of ways. First, our complex SDF forecasts
future not just consumption and output, but a wide range of macroeconomic activity and
conditions. The macro predictability arising from our model is larger in magnitude than
that of benchmark factor models in the literature. A particularly important new finding is
our complex SDF’s strong predictability for macroeconomic uncertainty, giving credence to
popular consumption-based asset pricing models with stochastic macroeconomic volatility
(e.g. Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Campbell et al., 2018). In contrast, none of the standard
benchmarks demonstrate any ability predict macroeconomic uncertainty.8
Through its coupling with the literature on factor pricing models, our work also relates
to the empirical literature surrounding the “factor zoo” and factor replicability, including
Harvey et al. (2016), McLean and Pontiff (2016), Hou et al. (2020), Feng et al. (2020),
Jensen et al. (2023), and Chen and Zimmermann (2021). Our theory helps rationalize the
continued discovery of factors that are unspanned by simpler precedent models. Relatedly,
the demonstrated success of machine learning models in predicting the cross-section of
returns such as Chinco et al. (2019), Han et al. (2019), Freyberger et al. (2020), Rapach
and Zhou (2020), Gu et al. (2020b), Avramov et al. (2023), and Guijarro-Ordonez et al.
(2021), is additional evidence of the virtue of complexity in financial markets research.
The remainder of the paper proceeds by introducing our empirical design in Section 2
7Chernov et al. (2023) demonstrate that currency returns are also predictive of future consumption.
8Relatedly, Bryzgalova et al. (Forthcoming) point out that consumption volatility shocks are conspicuously
absent from their estimation of the risk-return tradeoff.
9


=== PAGE 11 ===
and our empirical findings in Section 3. Section 4 presents our theoretical analysis of large
factor models, and Section 5 concludes.
2
Empirical Framework
We now present the details of our empirical framework for large factor pricing models and
their associated SDF representations.
2.1
Background: Factor Models and the SDF
Hansen and Richard (1987) show that a true SDF, if one exists, is representable as a tradable
portfolio of risky assets as introduced in Equation (1).
A factor pricing model is equivalent to an SDF that is linear in the factors. We can,
therefore, analyze and compare asset pricing factor models as competing SDF specifications.
Motivated by the APT and the principle of parsimony,9 the literature has primarily
investigated (1) with tightly constrained factor specifications of the SDF weight function
w(Zt). A leading example is the Fama and French (1993) model, which restricts Mt+1 to be
a three-parameter model:
wFF
i
= c1MKTi + c2SIZEi + c3VALUEi,
where the weight of asset i in the Fama-French SDF (wFF
i ) depends only on the stock’s
weight in the market portfolio (MKTi) and on researcher-dictated functions of the stock’s
size and book-to-market ratio (SIZEi and VALUEi).
The Fama-French SDF portfolio can equivalently (and more familiarly) be viewed as a
9See, e.g., Tukey (1961) and Box and Jenkins (1970).
Economic theory also motivates functional
restrictions on the SDF (e.g. Hansen and Singleton, 1982). However, restrictions derived from economic
theory have had limited success to date in pricing cross-sections of assets such as stocks, bonds, and
derivatives. The Fama-French SDF and many other factor models in the literature are motivated by empirical
“anomalies” vis-a-vis the CAPM and not by a particular economic theory.
10


=== PAGE 12 ===
linear combination of three factors. The factors are portfolios whose individual stock weights
are given by MKTi, SIZEi, and VALUEi, respectively. The SDF combines these factors with
three parameters, c1, c2, and c3, corresponding to the Sharpe ratio maximizing combination
of the factors. These are the only three parameters that must be estimated in the Fama-
French SDF, resulting in an extraordinarily parsimonious asset pricing model. Thus, the
Fama-French model is a special case of (1) where
w(ZFF
t
) = ZFF
t
λFF.
The conditioning set is ZFF
t
, which has D = 3 columns containing stocks’ Fama-French
characteristics, and the weight function is linear in parameters λFF = (c1, c2, c3)′. In this
case, the SDF is
M FF
t
= 1 −λFF ′ZFF
t
′Rt+1,
where we recognize that ZFF
t
′Rt+1 is a vector of time t returns on the three Fama-French
factors and 1 −M FF
t
is their mean-variance efficient combination.
2.2
Designing A Large Factor Model
The Fama-French model achieves its parsimony from rigid assumptions on the SDF weighting
function—discarding all but a few conditioning variables and making detailed choices for the
functional form that maps the selected variables into SDF weights.
The AIPT takes a different approach, founded on the philosophy of machine learning,
and explores the benefits of flexible models that accommodate many potential conditioning
variables and diverse functional forms. In our analysis, Zt is an Nt × D matrix that collects
a large number of D conditioning variables for each risky asset.
We derive a complex
factor pricing model by replacing detailed specification choices with a generic nonparametric
11


=== PAGE 13 ===
approximation to the unknown SDF:
w(Zt) ≈
P
X
p=1
λpSp(Zt) = Stλ,
(3)
where each Sp(Zt) is an Nt×1 nonlinear basis function of the input data Zt and λp is a scalar
basis coefficient. This basis expansion explores the space of potential shapes for w(Zt), then
combines these building blocks with coefficients (λp) that best reconstruct the unknown
function w(Zt).
Collecting the P basis terms into an Nt × P matrix of characteristics
St = [S1,t, ..., SP,t], and collecting parameters λ = [λ1, ..., λP]′, we arrive at Stλ as the
nonparametric approximation to the true SDF weighting function.
The larger is P, the
broader the set of nonlinearities considered, the larger the number of model parameters, and
the more flexible the approximation.
The nonparametric approximation in (3) takes the same basic form as the Fama-French
SDF with St in place of ZFF
t
. The basis terms Sp(Zt) merely transform conditioning variables
into a large number of new nonlinear asset “characteristics” analogous to those underpinning
the Fama-French model. Substituting the approximation in (3) into the SDF definition (1),
we arrive at
Mt+1 ≈1 −λ′S′
tRt+1 = 1 −λ′Ft+1 = 1 −RM
t+1.
(4)
In other words, like the Fama-French model, the SDF portfolio (denoted RM
t+1 = λ′Ft+1) is a
linear combination of factor portfolios,
Ft+1 = S′
tRt+1.
(5)
Each factor Fp,t+1 = Sp(Zt)′Rt+1 is a characteristic-managed portfolio of risky assets that
uses the nonlinear asset “characteristic” Sp(Zt) as the vector of portfolio weights, and again λ
12


=== PAGE 14 ===
is the mean-variance efficient combination of factors.10 The difference vis-a-vis Fama-French
(and other parsimonious models) is that the factors in (4) make flexible and nonlinear use
of conditioning data, and there are a large number P of these factors.
2.3
Random Fourier Factors
To operationalize this large factor model approximation of the SDF, our empirical approach
adapts the method of random Fourier features, or RFF (Rahimi and Recht, 2007).11 While
(Rahimi and Recht, 2007) propose RFF for predictive regression, our approach embeds RFF
in an SDF. The nonlinear basis functions in this method are trigonometric transformations
of the original signals Zt:
[S2p−1,tS2p,t] ∈RNt×2 = [sin(γZtωp), cos(γZtωp)]′ ,
ωp ∼i.i.d. N(0, I),
p = 1, ..., P/2. (6)
Each RFF basis function forms a random linear combination (ωp) of the raw characteristics
Zt, then feeds this through sine and cosine activation functions.12 The transformation is
applied stock-by-stock, converting stock i’s characteristics into new nonlinear characteristics
that include not just transformations of each individual characteristic but general multi-way
interactive effects involving all characteristics for stock i.
Upon closer inspection, we see that the SDF in (4) is, in fact, a two-layer neural
network with input parameters given by ωp, output parameters given by λ, and trigonometric
activation neurons (see Figure 1). In a typical neural network, both the input and output
parameters are estimated using computationally costly numerical methods. The fascinating
insight of (Rahimi and Recht, 2007) is that, by using randomization to fix the input
10Because the size of the cross-section varies over time, our empirical analysis in fact scales the factors as
Ft+1 = N −1/2
t
S′
tRt+1 to maintain a relatively consistent scale of factor returns over time.
11In Section 3.8 we demonstrate the robustness of our findings to other complex model specifications.
12The parameter γ controls the Gaussian kernel bandwidth in generating random Fourier features.
Following Kelly et al. (2022), we randomly chose γ from the grid [0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0] for each ωi that
we generate. This embeds varying degrees of nonlinearity in the generated feature set St.
13


=== PAGE 15 ===
wi,t=S′
i,tλ
Si,t=
nh
sin(γZ′
i,tωp), cos(γZ′
i,tωp)
ioP
p=1
Zi,t
Figure 1: Neural Network Representation of Random Fourier Factors
Note. Illustration of nonlinear mapping from stock i’s characteristics Zi,t into hidden layer neurons Si,t
and then into the conditional SDF weight wi,t during the construction of random Fourier factors.
parameters and only estimating the output parameters, random features regression can build
nonparametric approximations in a computationally efficient manner.13
Building on this
insight, our SDF model is estimable in closed form using only least squares regression (as
discussed below).
RFF is an ideal tool for our analysis because, from a fixed input data set Zt we can create
asset pricing models with any desired factor dimension, P. For a low-dimensional model of,
say, P = 2, one generates a single pair of RFFs. For a high-dimensional model of, say,
P = 10,000, one can instead draw many random weight vectors ωp, p = 1, ..., 5,000. This
gives us the ability to evaluate how asset pricing models are impacted by varying the number
of factors while holding the set of conditioning variables fixed. It is important to emphasize
that in our analysis, factor proliferation arises not from expanding the set of input data Zt
(which may or may not be low-dimensional) but instead from generating many nonlinear
basis transformations of Zt.
2.4
Estimator
The SDF coefficient vector λ represents the mean-variance efficient portfolio of factors. Note
that the factor representation of the conditional SDF in essence produces an equivalent
unconditional SDF. This allows us to estimate λ as the sample Markowitz portfolio of factors:
13Indeed, RFF is a special case of kernel regression. For applications of kernel regression in asset pricing
settings, see Kozak (2020) and Kelly et al. (2024a).
14


=== PAGE 16 ===
arg max
λ

ˆE[λ′Ft] −1
2
ˆE

(λ′Ft)2
= ˆE[FtF ′
t]−1 ˆE[Ft]
(7)
where ˆE denotes the training sample mean. We denote the corresponding estimated SDF
and SDF portfolio as
ˆ
Mt = 1 −ˆRM
t
and
ˆRM
t
= ˆλ′Ft.
(8)
The AIPT explores large factor models in which the dimension of λ may exceed the
number of time series observations, i.e., P > T. In this case, ˆE[FtF ′
t]−1 is rank-deficient,
which we resolve by introducing a ridge penalty in the Markowitz problem:
ˆλ(z) = arg max
λ

ˆE[λ′Ft] −1
2
ˆE

(λ′Ft)2
−zλ′λ

=

zI + ˆE[FtF ′
t]
−1 ˆE[Ft]
(9)
where z is the ridge parameter.
Kozak et al. (2020) point out that we can also interpret ˆλ(z) in terms of “pricing errors.”
Since the factors Ft are tradable assets, the true SDF Mt prices these factors with zero error
due to the marginal investor’s first-order optimality condition:
E[MtFt] = 0.
(10)
Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) suggest a statistic for comparing the efficacy of SDF
models in terms of their pricing error magnitudes. For a candidate SDF ˜
Mt, The Hansen-
Jagannathan distance (HJD) is a weighted sum of squared pricing errors for the set of test
15


=== PAGE 17 ===
assets Ft:14
DHJ = E[ ˜
MtFt]′E[FtF ′
t]−1E[ ˜
MtFt].
(11)
Substituting the SDF approximation model (4) for ˜
M in the HJD and adding a ridge penalty
to handle rank deficiency when P > T, we have
ˆλ(z) = arg min
λ
n
ˆE[(1 −λ′Ft)Ft]′ ˆE[FtF ′
t]−1 ˆE[(1 −λ′Ft)Ft] + zλ′λ
o
.
(12)
In other words, ˆλ(z) is also the regularized SDF estimator that minimizes pricing error (we
discuss HJD in further detail in Section 2.6).
2.5
Data and Training
To make the conclusions from this analysis as easy to digest as possible, we perform our
analysis in a conventional setting with conventional data.
We use a comprehensive and
standardized sample of monthly US stock returns and 153 stock characteristics from 1963 to
2023, compiled by Jensen et al. (2023) (JKP henceforth).15 As in JKP, our universe includes
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ securities with CRSP share code 10, 11, or 12, excluding “nano”
stocks (i.e., stocks with market capitalization below the first percentile of NYSE stocks).
Some of the JKP characteristics have low coverage, especially in the early parts of the
sample. To ensure that characteristic composition is fairly homogeneous over time and to
avoid purging a large number of stock-month observations due to missing data, we reduce
the 153 characteristics to a smaller set of D = 130 characteristics with the fewest missing
values. We drop stock-month observations for which more than 30% of the 130 characteristic
values are missing and use Nt to denote the number of the remaining stock observations at
time t. Next, we cross-sectionally rank-standardize each characteristic and map it to the
14We discuss some attractive properties of the HJD in the following sections.
15To access the stock-level characteristic data and associated documentation, refer to jkpfactors.com.
16


=== PAGE 18 ===
[−0.5, 0.5] interval, following Gu et al. (2020b). Ultimately, we obtain an Nt × D matrix of
conditioning characteristics Zt in each month.
In our empirical analyses, we study SDF performance as we vary two aspects of the model:
the number of factors P and ridge penalty z. For each model of a given size and shrinkage,
we conduct a rolling out-of-sample model performance analysis. Starting in January 1993, in
each month t, we use the most recent 360 months of data to estimate the ridge SDF parameter
in (9).16 We then track the out-of-sample SDF portfolio return in the subsequent month.
From the sequence of monthly out-of-sample SDF realizations, we calculate out-of-sample
SDF performance metrics.
2.6
Performance Metrics
We evaluate our SDF models with two standard out-of-sample performance metrics. A true
SDF is the mean-variance efficient portfolio of risky assets. Thus, our first performance
metric is the SDF portfolio Sharpe ratio. For a candidate SDF ˜
Mt = 1−˜RM
t , the annualized
out-of-sample Sharpe ratio is
c
SR =
√
12
ˆEOS[ ˜RM
t ]
ˆσOS( ˜RM
t )
where ˆEOS and ˆσOS denote sample average and standard deviation among the TOS out-of-
sample observations (to differentiate versus the notation ˆE and T used for training samples).
Since the SDF is constructed from excess returns on risky assets, the numerator need not be
adjusted for the risk-free rate.
Our second performance metric is the pricing error for a large set of test assets. The test
assets in our main analysis are the 153 JKP anomaly factors constructed by those authors
16The stochastic nature of RFF means that there is inherent variability in the estimated SDF model when
P is small. To mitigate this variability, we repeat the RFF-based estimation 20 times with different random
seeds and report average performance metrics across seeds. This has little qualitative effect on the plots
shown. See KMZ for further discussion of this point.
17


=== PAGE 19 ===
and downloadable at jkpfactors.com (robustness analyses report pricing errors for other
test asset sets as well). To aggregate test asset pricing errors into a single metric, we calculate
the normalized sum of squared pricing errors according to the Hansen-Jagannathan distance
(HJD) referenced in Section 2.4. For a set of test asset returns RT
t , the out-of-sample HJD
is
ˆDHJ = ˆEOS
h
˜
MtRT
t
i′ ˆEOS
h
RT
t RT
t
′i+ ˆEOS
h
˜
MtRT
t
i
,
(13)
where + is the Moore-Penrose quasi-inverse (necessary due to the degeneracy of ˆEOS[RT
t RT
t
′]
when P > TOS).
The HJD has a number of attractive model comparison properties.17 It averages pricing
errors among test assets using a common weighting matrix for all candidate models of
Mt. This is important because it puts all models on equal footing for comparison, unlike
other alpha or GMM-based comparisons. The weighting matrix is economically motivated
since it gives the HJD a clear interpretation as the pricing error of the portfolio of test
assets that is most mispriced by each model. Furthermore, the HJD is scale invariant.18
While typically used for in-sample comparison, the HJD easily generalizes for out-of-sample
evaluation because it avoids the need to estimate out-of-sample time series alphas and betas
for each test asset. Finally, because our theoretical derivations explicitly characterize the
expected out-of-sample HJD for complex SDF models, the empirical HJD can be directly
compared to theoretical predictions.
17In addition to Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), the literature including Kan and Robotti (2009), Chen
and Ludvigson (2009), and Kelly and Xiu (2023) further advocates HJD as a pricing error metric.
18Differences in volatilities among factors can skew test statistics like average absolute alpha or the GRS
statistic, and as a result, the volatility scaling choice for test assets can lead to different conclusions. HJD
is invariant to changes in test asset volatility.
18


=== PAGE 20 ===
2.7
Benchmark Models
We provide reference points for our analysis by comparing large factor model performance
to five benchmark factor pricing models in the literature:19
FF6: This is a six-factor model that includes the five factors of Fama and French (2015) plus
their UMD momentum.
SY: This is a four-factor model that includes the “mispricing” factors of Stambaugh and
Yuan (2017).
HXZ: This is a five-factor model that includes the q-factor model specification of Hou et al.
(2015) augmented to include the expected growth factor of Hou et al. (2021).
DHS: This is a three-factor model that includes the long-horizon and short-horizon behavioral
factors of Daniel et al. (2020).
BS: This is a composite model that selects factors from the literature based on the Bayesian
methodology of Barillas and Shanken (2018). Its six factors include the market factor,
the investment and profitability factors from Hou et al. (2015), the size and momentum
factors from Fama and French (2015), and the value factor (HMLm) from Asness et al.
(2013).
To compare models, we use the SDF corresponding to each of these factor pricing models,
which requires estimating the Markowitz portfolio of factors in each model. We do this in
rolling 360-month training windows and track benchmark performance out-of-sample. In
other words, we use the same training/evaluation design for the benchmarks that we use for
our large factor pricing models.20
19All benchmark factor data are conveniently available from the respective authors’ websites.
20When building the Markowitz portfolio for each benchmark model, we do not use ridge shrinkage because
the number of assets is far smaller than the number of time series observations. Even with infeasible (ex-
post optimal) ridge shrinkage, we find the out-of-sample SDF performance of benchmark models changes
negligibly.
19


=== PAGE 21 ===
3
Empirical Results
3.1
The Virtue of Complexity in Factor Pricing Models
Our central empirical finding is that factor model performance is increasing in the number of
factors. We illustrate this virtue of complexity by plotting out-of-sample model performance
as a function of the number of model parameters (which, in our setting, corresponds to
the number of factors).
KMZ refer to such plots as “VoC curves.”
Each curve applies
a different ridge penalty z = 10−5, 10−3, 10−1, 1, or 10.
Along each curve, we vary the
complexity—i.e., the number of factors—in our SDF model. We consider specifications with
P = 36, ..., 360,000 random Fourier factors, corresponding to c = 0.1, ..., 1,000. The VoC
curves in Figure 2 show four out-of-sample properties of each SDF specification: expected
return (Panel A), volatility (Panel B), Sharpe ratio (Panel C), and pricing error (Panel D).
We find the following main patterns associated with model complexity. As we increase
the number of factors, i) the average SDF return rises, ii) SDF volatility rises, iii) the SDF
return increases faster than volatility, resulting in a rising SDF Sharpe ratio, iv) pricing
errors decline, and v) performance gains accrue more quickly with less ridge shrinkage. The
exceptions to these patterns occur when ridge shrinkage is small, and complexity is close to
one, in which case we see a spike in out-of-sample SDF volatility that induces an abrupt dip
in the Sharpe ratio and a spike in pricing error. This “double ascent” in Sharpe ratio and
“double descent” in pricing error is reminiscent of previously documented phenomena in the
machine learning literature (e.g. Hastie et al., 2019; Bartlett et al., 2020).
Quantitatively, the differences in out-of-sample performance for high and low-complexity
models are dramatic despite the fact that both model types use identical data inputs and
differ only in the richness of their parameterizations. High-complexity models with light
shrinkage earn out-of-sample Sharpe ratios near 3.7, roughly 2.6 times larger than the Sharpe
ratios of low-complexity models with c < 1. Likewise, large factor models are much better
20


=== PAGE 22 ===
Panel A: Expected Return
Panel B: Standard Deviation
Panel C: Sharpe Ratio
Panel D: Pricing Error
Figure 2: Out-of-sample Performance of Complex Factor Models
Note. Realized out-of-sample SDF portfolio average return, standard deviation, Sharpe ratio, and pricing
error (HJD). The horizontal axis shows model complexity c = P/T, with P ranging from 36 to 360,000
and T = 360 months. Factors underlying the SDF are characteristic-managed portfolios constructed with
random Fourier features derived from JKP stock characteristics. The test assets in Panel D are 153 anomaly
factors from JKP.
positioned to price our demanding test assets (153 anomaly portfolios collected from decades
of finance research). Pricing errors for low-complexity models are more than twice as large
as those for high-complexity models (0.54 vs 0.22).
21


=== PAGE 23 ===
Panel A: Sharpe Ratio
Panel B: Cumulative Return
Panel C: Pricing Error
Figure 3: Performance Comparison of Complex and Benchmark Factor Models
Note. This figure reports the out-of-sample performance of SDF portfolios corresponding to various factor
pricing models, including the complex model (P = 360, 000 and z = 10−5) as well as the simple benchmark
models FF6, HXZ, SY, DHS, and BS. Panel A shows the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio for each model’s factor
Markowitz portfolio. Panel B shows the simple cumulative sum of out-of-sample returns for each model’s
factor Markowitz portfolio (we have standardized out-of-sample returns to 10% annualized volatility for all
models in order to facilitate comparison in this panel). Panel C shows pricing errors (HJD) for four sets
of test assets, including are the 360,000 random Fourier factors underlying the large factor model (denoted
“complex”), the 153 JKP factors, the 13 JKP aggregate theme factors, and the 25 Fama-French size and
book-to-market portfolios. Benchmark data sets are available for different sample periods, so we report
statistics on the intersection of their out-of-sample ranges, which is from August 2002 to December 2016.
22


=== PAGE 24 ===
3.2
Comparison With Benchmarks
In Figure 2, we compare large and small variants of factor models using random Fourier
factors. However, the conclusion that large factor models outperform simple models is not
specific to the nonparametric framework in Figure 2.
Figure 3 compares the high complexity factor model (P = 360, 000 and z = 10−5) to
five of the leading factor models in the literature: FF6, HXZ, SY, DHS, and BS. Panel A
reports the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio for each model’s SDF portfolio, Panel B shows the
corresponding cumulative return plot, and Panel C reports out-of-sample pricing errors.21
Panel A shows that the benchmark factor models are all roughly on par with each other in
terms of Sharpe ratio, while the complex model rather dramatically outperforms every simple
model. Its Sharpe ratio is around 3-6 times higher than the benchmarks. The cumulative
returns in Panel B show that the portfolio performance comparison is not driven by any
particular subsample and that the complex model does not exhibit any periods of unusually
turbulent behavior.
Panel C shows that the large factor model also dominates in terms of pricing error.
When the 153 JKP factors are test assets, HJD for the benchmark models hovers around
0.9, roughly twice that of the large factor model. This finding is not specific to this set of
test assets. When the test assets are the 360,000 random Fourier factors themselves, the
HJD hovers around 0.95 for benchmark models, again roughly twice the HJD of the complex
factor model. Third, we study the JKP theme factors, which collect the individual anomaly
factors into 13 aggregate theme portfolios. The benchmark HJD for this test set is around
0.2, which is roughly four times larger than the complex model HJD. Finally, we use the
classic Fama-French 25 size and value portfolios. This test set has been the target for pricing
models for forty years, and one can argue that benchmark models have been honed to price
21Figure 3 shows small differences in performance metrics for the high complexity factor model compared
to Figure 2. This is because Figure 3 is restricted to a shorter time sample in which data is available for all
benchmark models.
23


=== PAGE 25 ===
Table 1: Performance Comparison of Complex and Benchmark Factor Models
This table reports a comparison of out-of-sample SDF portfolio performance for various factor pricing models,
including the complex model (P = 360, 000 and z = 10−5) as well as the simple benchmark models FF6,
HXZ, SY, DHS, and BS. The first two rows show the annualized percentage alpha and associated t statistic of
the complex SDF portfolios versus each benchmark SDF portfolio. The next two rows show each benchmark
SDF portfolio’s alpha and t statistic versus the complex model. The last two rows show the ex-post tangency
portfolio weights combining the SDF portfolios of all models with and without a non-negativity constraint
(and constraining weights to sum to one). To facilitate alpha comparisons, out-of-sample SDF portfolio
returns for all models are rescaled to have 10% annualized volatility. Benchmark data sets are available for
different sample periods, so we report statistics on the intersection of their out-of-sample ranges, which is
from August 2002 to December 2016.
LHS
FF6
SY
HXZ
DHS
BS
Complex
Complex Alpha
42.8
40.7
39.4
43.5
44.4
–
vs. Benchmark
(13.9)
(13.6)
(13.0)
(13.7)
(13.8)
–
Benchmark Alpha
-2.8
-4.3
-2.3
1.50
3.90
–
vs. Complex
(-0.7)
(-1.2)
(-0.6)
(0.40)
(1.00)
–
Tangency Weights
Unconstrained
-0.44
-0.24
-0.01
0.12
0.56
1.01
Non-negative
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.09
0.90
test assets like these. Even in this case, benchmark models deliver an out-of-sample pricing
error of around 0.2, roughly three times larger than those from the complex pricing model.
Table 1 extends the benchmark comparison by reporting pairwise alphas between SDF
portfolios of the large factor pricing model and each of the benchmark models. For this,
we use the out-of-sample SDF portfolios but renormalize them ex post to a 10% annualized
volatility to make alphas comparable for all models (unlike HJD, alphas lack scale invariance,
so volatility scaling is helpful for comparison). The complex model produces a large and
highly significant alpha versus all benchmarks, ranging from 39.4% to 44.4% per annum.
The reverse is not true.
Benchmark models all have small and statistically insignificant
alphas versus the complex model. Finally, we estimate the “meta”-Markowitz portfolio that
combines SDF portfolios of all individual models. The complex model dominates the meta
24


=== PAGE 26 ===
Figure 4: Complex Versions of Benchmark Models
Note.
The figure reports out-of-sample Sharpe ratios of simple benchmark models compared to their
nonlinear, high-complexity counterparts. For each benchmark model we construct its high complexity SDF
with random Fourier factors derived from the characteristics underlying that model: size, value, investment,
profitability, and momentum for FF6; size and two mispricing measures (MGMT and PERF) for SY; size,
investment, profitability and expected growth for HXZ; size, PEAD, and two measures of issuance (CSI and
NSI) for DHS; and asset growth, profitability, size, value and momentum for BS. Complex versions of each
benchmark use P = 360, 000 factors (c = 1000) and shrinkage of z = 10−5, 10−3, 10−1 or 1.
portfolio, receiving a weight of 101% in the unconstrained portfolio and a weight of 90% in
the portfolio that constrains weights on individual models to be non-negative.
3.3
The Nonlinear Fama-French Model
In the preceding analysis, we compare high complexity factor models derived from 130 JKP
characteristics to the FF6 model and other benchmarks that are low complexity models
derived from a small set of characteristics. Naturally, one may wonder about the benefits of
complexity when we restrict the raw data inputs to match those used by a given benchmark
25


=== PAGE 27 ===
model. To investigate this, we construct complex SDFs using random features derived from
only the characteristics that underly each benchmark. For example, in the case of FF6, we
construct a complex factor model with a large number of nonlinear factors derived from the
size, value, investment, profitability, and momentum characteristics.
Figure 4 reports the out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of high complexity variations of each
benchmark model using P = 360,000 (c = 1,000) random Fourier factors and ridge shrinkage
of z = 10−5, 10−3, 10−1 or 1.
The original formulation of the FF6 model has an out-of-
sample Sharpe ratio of 0.74, while its high complexity version ranges from 1.93 to 2.50
depending on the degree of shrinkage. All benchmarks show the same pattern—if we hold
the stock characteristics of each simple model fixed but enrich the model specification to
incorporate highly parameterized nonlinear transformations of those characteristics, the out-
of-sample performance of the benchmarks improves by a factor of 1.4 to 3.6, depending on
the benchmark and the amount of shrinkage.
The conclusion is that the benefits of large factor models accrue even when starting from
a small conditioning information set. Complexity may be applied to any set of conditioning
variables to more flexibly reflect patterns in the underlying return-generating process.
3.4
Macroeconomics of the Complex SDF
What is responsible for the high degree of mean-variance efficiency of the complex SDF
portfolio relative to benchmarks?
At a statistical level, the answer is straightforward:
The complex SDF model more successfully optimizes the maximum Sharpe ratio objective,
indicating that it estimates the “true” efficient portfolio with greater accuracy than the
benchmarks.
At an economic level, this improved measurement can help us better ascertain the
economic nature of the “true” SDF. In equilibrium asset pricing models, an SDF reflects
investors’ intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (IMRS), which is shaped by investors’
26


=== PAGE 28 ===
information and expectations about future macroeconomic conditions. As shown by Hansen
and Jagannathan (1991), the mean-variance efficient portfolio is a projection of the IMRS
onto the space of traded assets, resulting in a so-called “tradable” SDF like those studied
above. If, as econometricians, we achieve a more efficient tradable SDF, then we are more
successfully honing in on information and expectations about future economic conditions
that investors are collectively impounding into current prices and that govern investors’
IMRS. As articulated by Fama (1990) in his study of market returns and the macroeconomy,
“the general hypothesis ... is that information about the production of a given
period is spread across preceding periods and so affects the stock returns of
preceding periods.”
We extend Fama (1990)’s hypothesis to the modern setting of SDF returns. If a complex SDF
achieves superior mean-variance efficiency relative to benchmarks, it should better reflect
investors’ IMRS, and it should in turn be a stronger predictor of future economic conditions.
Or, stated more simply, portfolio efficiency and informational efficiency go hand-in-hand.
To pursue this hypothesis, we compare candidate SDFs in their ability to predict
macroeconomic activity. Let yt be a vector containing various measures of macro activity and
conditions in log levels at the monthly frequency. In our baseline specification, y includes
10 variables: industrial production, macroeconomic uncertainty, the Federal Funds rate,
employment, consumer sentiment from the Michigan survey, CPI, housing starts, the Baa-
Aaa yield spread, oil prices, and the trade-weighted dollar exchange rate index.22
The goal of our prediction analysis is to understand the extent to which information
realized in SDF portfolio returns reflects expectations of future macroeconomic conditions.
To accomplish this, we estimate impulse response functions using the method of local
22Nine of these variables are from the FRED-MD database and correspond to FRED identifiers IND-
PRO, FEDFUNDS, PAYEMS, UMCSENTx, CPIAUCSL, HOUST, AAA and BAA, OILPRICEx, TWEX-
AFEGSMTHx. The only variable not from FRED-MD is the macroeconomic uncertainty index (h = 1
variant) from Jurado et al. (2015).
27


=== PAGE 29 ===
Figure 5: Macroeconomic Impulse Response Functions
Note. This figure reports SDF impulse responses estimated from equation (14). Dependent variables are
shown in each figure title, and the impulse is a positive one standard deviation return to each SDF (the
complex SDF in blue and the FF6 SDF in red). Shaded regions are pointwise 90% confidence intervals based
on Newey-West standard errors with five lags.
projections (Jord`a, 2005) using the “long difference” form (Jord`a and Taylor, 2025):
yt+h −yt = ah + bSDF,h
 11
X
j=0
RM
t−j
!
/σM +
2
X
j=0
bj,hyt−j + et+h,
h = 1, ..., 36.
(14)
The regression coefficient bSDF,h directly estimates, for each element of y, the expected
h-period-ahead cumulative response (in percentage changes) to a positive one standard
deviation realization of the annual SDF return, while controlling for predictive information
28


=== PAGE 30 ===
in y’s own lags.23 We use a 12-month SDF return to accumulate information over a longer
interval and reduce noise in the regressor.24 We estimate regression (14) over the full out-of-
sample period 1993-2023 using realized returns for the complex SDF and each benchmark.
Figure 5 reports the estimated impulse responses for the complex SDF. To provide a
frame of reference Figure 5 also reports results for the FF6 SDF, which is representative
of results for the other benchmarks. (Results for the full set of benchmarks are shown in
Appendix L.)
The key conclusion from this analysis is that the complex SDF has strong predictive
power for macroeconomic conditions, particularly at long horizons of two years or more. A
positive one-standard-deviation annual return to the complex SDF predicts a roughly 3%
(and highly significant) increase in industrial production over three years.
It predicts a
reduction in macroeconomic uncertainty of about 7.5% over two years. It predicts large and
highly significant increases in employment (1.25%), consumer sentiment (9%), housing (9%),
and the dollar (2.5%) over three years. A positive complex SDF return predicts a reduction
in credit spreads of 0.08% over two years, which is a roughly 8% decrease in the credit
spread relative to its long-term average level of 0.95%. Finally, we see a positive interest
rate response of roughly 0.4% over 1.5 years (versus an average interest rate level of 2.5% in
our sample) and a negative response in CPI of 1% over three years.
In Appendix Figures IA.2 and IA.3, we repeat this analysis replacing the last variable in
y (Dollar index) with consumption. In this specification, we see that a positive one standard
deviation in the complex SDF return predicts a significant 0.7% increase in consumption
over three years. The remaining impulse responses are quantitatively unaffected, with the
23Among these ten variables, there are two that we use in levels without taking logs, these are the Federal
Funds rate and the Baa-Aaa credit spread, which are already reported in annualized percentages. In this
case, the bSDF,h coefficient describes the expected simple (not log) change in the corresponding variable.
24For this analysis, the annual SDF return is defined in standard deviation units,
P11
j=0 RM
t−j

/σM,
where σM is the sample standard deviation of on the rolling annual return.
29


=== PAGE 31 ===
Figure 6: SDF Returns and Future Macroeconomic Outcomes
Note. This figure reports the R2 from a regression of SDF returns on future macroeconomic outcomes per
equation (15).
exception that the response of the credit spread drops more quickly, bottoming out after
nine months rather than two years.
The results in Figure 5 illustrate the strength with which the complex SDF predicts a
variety of macroeconomic conditions. But how much of the SDF’s behavior can be attributed
to the market’s assimilation of information about future economic fundamentals collectively?
We devise an answer to this question by running a somewhat unconventional regression of
returns in month t on future realizations for all of the macroeconomic variables in y:
RM
t
= ah + b′
h(yt+h −yt) + et,
h = 1, ..., 36.
(15)
The R2 of this regression describes the fraction of SDF return variation that is attributable
to information about future macroeconomic conditions over horizons h = 1 to 36 months
ahead. Figure 6 plots the resulting R2 for the complex SDF and the FF6 benchmark SDF.
30


=== PAGE 32 ===
The complex SDF is predominantly driven by information about the macroeconomy
over long horizons. Cumulative macroeconomic realizations over the subsequent three years
explain 25% of the variation in complex SDF returns. This drops to around 5% if we restrict
to economic realizations over the next year. In contrast, only about 5% of the benchmark
SDF return is explained by future macroeconomic factors, regardless of the horizon we look
at.25
In summary, positive SDF returns predict rising production, employment, sentiment,
and housing; they predict decreasing risk, credit spreads, and inflation.
Our impulse
responses control for lags of y, implying that this predictive information in the complex
SDF is not spanned by standard macro variables. Meanwhile, the benchmark SDF shows
either little significant predictive power for macro variables, or the sign of the prediction is
counterintuitive (as in the case of employment).
The long-horizon impulse responses in Figure 5 are directionally consistent with equilib-
rium models incorporating recursive preferences and long-run risk, such as Bansal and Yaron
(2004) and Campbell et al. (2018). In these models, the SDF reflects investors’ expectations
about future output uncertainty over the long run. Empirically, long-run risks are notoriously
difficult to estimate and researchers continue to debate the reliability of proposed proxies (see
e.g. Liu and Matthies, 2022, 2024; Maio, 2024). Our complex SDF provides new empirical
evidence of the long-run risk mechanism in equity market prices.
Our empirical findings about the joint cyclical variation in uncertainty, production,
interest rates, and credit spreads are consistent with the equilibrium models of Gilchrist
and Zakrajˇsek (2011); Gilchrist et al. (2014); Christiano et al. (2014). Their focus relates
to the empirical fact that credit spreads and risk predict economic conditions (Gilchrist
and Zakrajˇsek, 2012; Gilchrist et al., 2009). Importantly, since we control for lags of y,
25Appendix L shows the same R2 plot for all benchmark models. The patterns for all benchmarks are
broadly similar to FF6. DHS is an exception in that it captures more information about future short-term
macroeconomic phenomena than the other SDFs.
31


=== PAGE 33 ===
our analysis indicates that the complex SDF incorporates differential information about the
macroeconomy above and beyond the information in prevailing credit spreads and risk.
Finally, our conclusions from the macroeconomic analysis above are robust to a variety of
alternative design choices in the analysis of (14), including changing the constituent variable
in y, changing the frequency of SDF return, and changing the number of y lags. These
results are reported in Appendix L.
3.5
SDF Complexity or SDF Sparsity?
A recent line of financial machine learning research suggests that it is possible to estimate a
successful factor pricing model through the imposition of sparsity.26 The evidence indicates
that an SDF model with a small number of factors can successfully price a wide variety of
test assets. This is exemplified by Kozak et al. (2018), who study a collection of difficult-to-
price anomaly portfolios that serve as their test assets. They then show that a simple linear
SDF—comprised of just a few principal components of the anomaly portfolios—is powerful
for pricing their entire anomaly cross-section.
The notion of SDF sparsity appears at odds with the benefits of complexity that
we document above.
While our results thus far demonstrate that a complex model can
identify efficacious nonlinear pricing factors, is it possible that we also introduce unnecessary
redundancy by using many thousands of factors? We investigate this possibility now.
In Figure 2, each point on each curve is a model with a particular number of factors, P,
and a particular shrinkage parameter, z. To investigate the potential benefits of sparsity,
we replace the P-factors in each model of Figure 2 with a small number K of principal
components derived from those P factors. We then re-estimate the SDF coefficients on the
K components and track the resulting out-of-sample factor model performance.
Figure 7 reports the results.
In the left column, we consider a K = 5 component
26This includes Gagliardini et al. (2016), Kelly et al. (2020), Kozak et al. (2020), Lettau and Pelger (2020),
and Giglio and Xiu (2021), among others.
32


=== PAGE 34 ===
K = 5
K = 25
Figure 7: The Effect of Sparsity on Out-of-sample SDF Performance
Note. Realized out-of-sample SDF Sharpe ratio (top row) and pricing error (HJD, bottom row) for complex
models with dimension reduction to K = 5 (left column) and K = 25 (right column) principal components.
The horizontal axis shows model complexity c = P/T with P ranging from 36 to 360,000 and T = 360
months. For ease of reference, “Complex Model” shows performance of the highest complexity model (P =
360,000, z = 10−5) from Figure 2 without dimension reduction.
dimension reduction of each complex factor model (corresponding to the K used in some
model specifications of Kozak et al., 2018; Kelly et al., 2020). The Sharpe ratio (top panel)
of the dimension-reduced SDF is roughly 1.3, compared to 3.7 for the full complexity model.
Likewise, pricing errors (bottom panel) are 0.57 for the K = 5 SDF versus 0.22 for the full
complexity model. In other words, imposing sparsity on the SDF via dimension reduction
inhibits SDF performance relative to the unreduced, high-complexity counterpart.
Kozak et al. (2018) consider larger numbers of principal components as well. The right
33


=== PAGE 35 ===
Figure 8: The Effect of Sparsity on Out-of-sample SDF Performance
Note. Realized out-of-sample SDF Sharpe ratio (top row) and pricing error (HJD, bottom row) for complex
models with dimension reduction to K = 5, ..., 360 principal components (x-axis).
column of Figure 7 shows that increasing model complexity by using K = 25 rather than
K = 5 principal components leads to a large improvement in out-of-sample performance.
But even in this case, the Sharpe ratio remains well below that of the full complexity model
(3.7 vs 2.9), and the pricing error remains 41% higher (0.31 vs 0.22).
Two properties of high-dimensional models drive this effect.
First, even if the true
(unobservable) factor covariance matrix has a few large eigenvalues and, hence, a strong
factor structure, the factors become difficult to detect when complexity is high.27 Second
and more surprisingly, even low-variance components have a significant Sharpe ratio, so
excluding them leads to a large drop in out-of-sample SDF performance.
This fact is
illustrated in Figure 8. In this analysis, we hold the number of factors in the underlying model
fixed at P = 360, 000, but vary the number of components extracted from the model from
K = 5, 10, ..., 360. Adding low variance components typically helps, and never hurts, out-
of-sample factor model performance. Based on this analysis, the AIPT’s large factor model
conjecture appears better suited for describing market behavior than does the parsimony
conjecture of the APT.
27See, e.g., Lettau and Pelger (2020).
34


