
=== PAGE 1 ===
 
  APT or ΓÇ£AIPTΓÇ¥? The Surp
University of Melbourne Shikun Ke
Yale School of Management Bryan Kelly
Yale School of Management, AQR Capital Management, and NBER 
 Semyon Malamud
Ecole Polytechnique F├⌐d├⌐rale de Lausanne, Swiss Finance Institute, and  
CEPR Swiss Finance Institu


=== PAGE 2 ===
APT or ΓÇ£AIPTΓÇ¥? The Surprising Dominance of Large
Factor Models
Antoine Didisheim, Shikun Ke, Bryan Kelly, and Semyon MalamudΓêù
July 22, 2025
Abstract
We introduce artificial intelligence pricing theory (AIPT). In contrast with the APTΓÇÖs
foundational assumption of a low dimensional factor structure in returns, the AIPT
conjectures that returns are driven by a large number of factors. We first verify this
conjecture empirically and show that complex nonlinear models with an exorbitant
number of factors (many more than the number of training observations or base assets)
are far more successful in describing the out-of-sample behavior of asset returns than
simpler benchmark models.
Economically, we show that complex models are more
than twice as sensitive to long-run macroeconomic activity than simpler benchmarks.
Finally, we theoretically characterize the behavior of large factor pricing models, from
which we show that the AIPTΓÇÖs ΓÇ£many factorsΓÇ¥ conjecture faithfully explains our
empirical findings, while the APTΓÇÖs ΓÇ£few factorsΓÇ¥ conjecture is contradicted by the
data.
Keywords: Machine learning, asset pricing, factor model, stochastic discount factor
(SDF), pricing error, cross-section of returns, portfolio choice
JEL: C3, C58, C61, G11, G12, G14
ΓêùA previously circulated version of this article was titled ΓÇ£Complexity in Factor Pricing Models.ΓÇ¥ Antoine
Didisheim is at the University of Melbourne. Shikun Ke is at Yale School of Management. Bryan Kelly
is at Yale School of Management, AQR Capital Management, and NBER; www.bryankellyacademic.org.
Semyon Malamud is at Swiss Finance Institute, EPFL, and CEPR, and is a consultant to AQR. We are
grateful for helpful comments from Federico Baldi-Lanfranchi, John Campbell, Mike Chernov, Xavier Gabaix,
Martin Lettau, Stefan Nagel, Mohammad Pourmohammadi, Seth Pruitt, Mirela Sandulescu, Paul Schneider,
Fabio Trojani, Neng Wang, and participants at many seminars and conferences. Semyon Malamud gratefully
acknowledges the financial support of the Swiss Finance Institute and the Swiss National Science Foundation,
Grant 100018 192692. AQR Capital Management is a global investment management firm that may or may
not apply similar investment techniques or methods of analysis as described herein. The views expressed
here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of AQR.


=== PAGE 3 ===
1
Introduction
RossΓÇÖs (1976) APT conjectures that a small number of common factors govern the joint
variation of returns.
This premise, combined with no-arbitrage arguments, delivers the
prediction that assetsΓÇÖ expected returns are determined by exposures to a few common
factors. Most empirical investigations of the risk-return tradeoff in the past fifty years have
occurred within the confines of the APTΓÇÖs assumptionΓÇösmall linear factor models.
In this paper, we consider a different conjecture: that asset pricing models with an
exorbitant number of factors are better suited to describe the behavior of asset returns. Our
conjecture is rooted in the burgeoning theory of artificial intelligence, which suggests that
ΓÇ£complexΓÇ¥ statistical models, those with many more parameters (P) than available training
observations (T), tend to achieve better out-of-sample success than smaller models.1 Given
its origins, we refer to this conjecture as artificial intelligence pricing theory, or AIPT, to
contrast it with the parsimony assumption at the heart of the APT.
One reason for the APTΓÇÖs position as a cornerstone of empirical asset pricing is the
convenience of working with small linear factor models.
The most obvious convenience
stems from the tractability of estimating small models. More subtle is the convenience of
comparing small models. The APT sets up conditions necessary for comparing models based
on in-sample test statistics (namely, that the number of parameters is small compared to the
number of training observations). Large factor models, on the other hand, are admittedly
inconvenient. With so many parameters, they can be costly to train, and due to their high
1See, among others, Hastie et al. (2019), Bartlett et al. (2020), and Kelly et al. (2024b). Following these
papers, we define model complexity as the ratio of factor dimension to the number of training observations
c = P/T. Our theoretical derivations rely crucially on the ratio c, hence our focus on this definition of
complexity. The statistics literature proposes and analyzes other measures of model complexity as well, each
capturing somewhat different qualities. As noted by Bartlett et al. (2020): ΓÇ£The classical perspective in
statistical learning theory is that there should be a tradeoff between the fit to the training data and the
complexity of the prediction rule. Whether complexity is measured in terms of the number of parameters,
the number of nonzero parameters in a high-dimensional setting, the number of neighbors averaged in a
nearest neighbor estimator, the scale of an estimate in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, or the bandwidth
of a kernel smoother, this tradeoff has been ubiquitous in statistical learning theory.ΓÇ¥
2


=== PAGE 4 ===
statistical complexity, standard in-sample asset pricing tests are not applicable. Instead,
they require out-of-sample model performance comparisons.
We show that, despite their inconveniences, large factor models are far better at pricing
assets than the standard low-dimensional factor models in the literature. In the first half
of this paper, we present extensive empirical evidence that challenges the APT parsimony
conjecture and favors the complexity conjecture of AIPT. In the second half of the paper
we develop a statistical theory that characterizes the behavior of complex factor models and
rationalizes their surprising dominance in pricing assets.
1.1
Empirical Behavior of Large Factor Models
Our central empirical finding is that the out-of-sample performance of factor pricing models
is increasing in the number of factors. We focus on two metrics of model performanceΓÇö the
Sharpe ratio of the tangency portfolio among factors and the magnitude of pricing errors
among test assets.
Our analysis gradually increases the number of factors while holding the underlying
information set fixed.
The information set includes 130 well-known characteristics that
predict the cross-section of US stocks.
To vary the number of pricing factors, we use a
neural network to generate new stock characteristicsΓÇöup to hundreds of thousandsΓÇöthat are
nonlinear transformations of the original 130 variables. For each nonlinear characteristic, we
build the corresponding factor (using a standard characteristic-managed portfolio approach).
Training the factor model amounts to building the stochastic discount factor (SDF) as the
tangency portfolio of factors (using ridge shrinkage where applicable). We then track the
complex SDFΓÇÖs performance out-of-sample, presenting our main empirical results in the
form of ΓÇ£VoC curvesΓÇ¥ (Kelly et al., 2024b, KMZ henceforth) that plot performance as a
function of the number of factors. These curves document a ΓÇ£virtue of complexityΓÇ¥ in factor
pricing models, with out-of-sample Sharpe ratios increasing and pricing errors decreasing
3


=== PAGE 5 ===
as we expand the number of factors. The complex SDF performs well even whenΓÇöin fact,
especially whenΓÇöP far exceeds T.
Large factor models outperform well-known, low-dimensional factor models from the
literature by a wide margin.
For example, the largest model we consider (with 360,000
factors, or a complexity ratio of 1,000 given our 360-month rolling training window) reduces
pricing errors by 54.8% relative to the six-factor Fama and French (2015) model (including
momentum) and by 50.4% relative to the five-factor Hou et al. (2021) model. Meanwhile,
our largest factor model produces an out-of-sample tangency Sharpe ratio of 3.7, compared
to 0.8 and 1.2 for the aforementioned benchmarks, respectively.2
Improvements in SDF measurement achieved by large factor models offer a window into
the economic nature of the unobservable ΓÇ£trueΓÇ¥ SDF. We argue that the higher an SDFΓÇÖs out-
of-sample Sharpe ratio, the better it reflects the drivers of investorsΓÇÖ intertemporal marginal
rate of substitution, and thus the better it should reflect expectations of future economic
conditions. In other words, portfolio efficiency and informational efficiency go hand-in-hand.
We estimate a macroeconomic vector autoregression and find that the complex SDF is an
unusually strong forecaster of macroeconomic conditions as far as three years into the future.
For example, a positive one standard deviation annual return to the complex SDF predicts a
roughly 3% rise in industrial production over three years and a reduction in macroeconomic
uncertainty of about 7.5% over two years. A positive SDF return also predict significant
increases in employment, consumption, consumer sentiment, and housing over horizons of
up to three years, and it predicts a decrease in credit spreads and inflation.
The asset pricing benefits of complexity and nonlinearity accrue even when the condition-
ing information set is relatively small. For example, we construct a ΓÇ£nonlinear Fama-French
modelΓÇ¥ using a large set of nonlinear factors derived from only five characteristics: size, value,
investment, profitability, and momentum, rather than the full set of 130 characteristics in our
main analysis. The added complexity more than doubles the out-of-sample tangency Sharpe
2We study a number of additional benchmark models as well.
4


=== PAGE 6 ===
ratio relative to the baseline Fama-French model.
The same result obtains for complex
nonlinear versions of other benchmark models in the literature.
The insights of Kozak et al. (2020) suggest that a successful asset pricing model may not
require many factors because the returns of most anomaly factors are adequately explained
by a small number of their principal components. This begs the question: Can our complex
pricing model be compressed to achieve similar performance with potentially many fewer
parameters?
Evidently, the answer is no.
We consider replacing the large number of
factors in our complex model with a smaller number of their principal components and
find that dimension reduction significantly impairs out-of-sample performance relative to
the full complex model.
Lastly, we conduct a variety of robustness analyses that consider different input char-
acteristics, various subsets of the stock universe, different training windows, and so forth.
Every robustness test reinforces our main findings. In summary, we establish the empirical
fact that large factor models are better at pricing assets than existing parsimonious models.
1.2
Theoretical Findings
In order to understand our empirical findings, we develop a statistical theory of large factor
pricing models. Consider the following interpretation of a large factor model from the asset
pricing theory perspective of an SDF. A conditional SDF can be represented as a tradable
portfolio of risky assets:
Mt+1 = 1 ΓêÆw(Zt)ΓÇ▓Rt+1.
(1)
Rt+1 contains excess returns of risky assets, and w(Zt) are the SDFΓÇÖs weights on those
assets. The weights are determined by variables Zt that span the time t information set.
Without further guidance about the functional form of w, a machine learning-based empirical
approach would approximate the SDF with a nonparametric model such as a shallow neural
5


=== PAGE 7 ===
network: w(Zt) ΓëêPP
p=1 ╬╗pSp(Zt), where each Sp(Zt) is some nonlinear basis function of Zt.
Thus, a neural network SDF delivers a linear factor pricing model,
Mt+1 Γëê1 ΓêÆ
X
p
╬╗pFp,t+1,
(2)
where each ΓÇ£factorΓÇ¥ Fp,t+1 is a characteristic-managed portfolio that uses the transformed
ΓÇ£characteristicsΓÇ¥ Sp(Zt) as portfolio weights, and ╬╗ = (╬╗1, ..., ╬╗P) are parameters to be
estimated.
This formulation captures the tension in machine learning asset pricing models. On the
one hand, the more terms in the nonparametric representation of w (and thus the larger
the number of factors), the better the model can approximate the true SDF. But as we
improve the approximation, we simultaneously increase the number of parameters that must
be estimated, so when P becomes large, the estimated model may be unstable and suffer
out-of-sample. Our theory makes it possible to understand (and quantitatively characterize)
this cost/benefit tradeoff in large factor models. This is non-trivial and requires our novel
random matrix theory (RMT) results that allow us to tackle the ΓÇ£three infinitiesΓÇ¥ problem
(when the number of assets, observations, and parameters are simultaneously large).3
On the cost side of the tradeoff is a phenomenon we refer to as ΓÇ£limits to learning.ΓÇ¥
In low complexity settingsΓÇöwith many more observations than parameters to estimateΓÇö
the law of large numbers kicks in, and appropriate estimators can recover the true model.4
Traditional econometric theory deals with estimator behavior in this data-rich environment.
By contrast, in high-complexity settings, the number of factors is large relative to the number
of observations.
Thus, the law of large numbers breaks down.
Even correctly specified
estimators fail to converge on the true model because there is not enough data to go around.
The first key aspect of our theory is an explicit characterization of the limits to the learning
3Established RMT results (e.g., those from Hastie et al., 2019) are insufficient in our context.
4I.e., if the model is correctly specified. If the model is mis-specified, estimators recover the nearest
ΓÇ£pseudo-trueΓÇ¥ parameters (e.g. White, 1996).
6


=== PAGE 8 ===
effect. We prove that data limitations impose an unavoidable implicit shrinkage of the model,
which depresses the modelΓÇÖs expressive power. Complexity induces bias through its implicit
shrinkage. But on the benefit side of the tradeoff, complexity also reduces specification bias.
More factors lead to a more accurate approximation of the true SDF. Our main theoretical
result shows that which effect dominates depends on the eigenvalue distribution of the factors.
When there is a concentrated eigenvalue distribution and thus a few dominant factors, asset
pricing model performance tops out after adding only a few factors, and there is no virtue
of complexityΓÇöa counterfactual prediction in light of our empirical findings.
However, when the underlying factor structure is not too concentratedΓÇöthat is, when the
data-generating process aligns with the AIPT conjectureΓÇöa virtue of complexity emerges
that closely mimics the patterns we find in the data. Our theory rationalizes our surprising
empirical facts, demonstrating that even if arbitrage is absent and an SDF exists, it is
possible to continually find new empirical ΓÇ£riskΓÇ¥ factors that are unpriced by others and that
adding these factors to the pricing model continually improves its out-of-sample performance.
The theory also helps rationalize the prominence of ΓÇ£anomalyΓÇ¥ portfolios in empirical asset
pricing. The abundance of anomalies (the so-called ΓÇ£factor zooΓÇ¥) is not a puzzle to be solved
or evidence of a corrupt research process.5 Instead, it is the theoretically expected outcome
in a complex asset pricing environment because data limitations hamper our ability to learn
the true nature of markets. In fact, our theory argues that the extant factor zoo is too small
and that an SDF model can be beneficially expanded to incorporate a teeming NoahΓÇÖs ark
of factors by transforming raw asset characteristics into a wide variety of nonlinear signals
(buttressed by appropriate shrinkage). Such a large factor set improves the out-of-sample
SDF Sharpe ratio and reduces out-of-sample pricing errors.
5Jensen et al. (2023) reach a similar conclusion based on the rationale that the risk-return trade-off is
difficult to measure and complexity manifests as an inability to find a single silver-bullet characteristic that
pins down expected returns. Instead, researchers gradually expand and refine the set of noisy signals and
conclude ΓÇ£a more positive take on the factor zoo is not as a collective exercise in data mining and false
discovery, but rather as a natural outcome of a decentralized effort in which researchers make contributions
that are correlated with, but incrementally improve on, the body of knowledge.ΓÇ¥
7


=== PAGE 9 ===
1.3
Literature Review
This paper is related to an emergent literature that shows machine learning asset pricing
models achieve higher out-of-sample Sharpe ratios and smaller pricing errors than their
parsimonious predecessors. Examples include Kozak et al. (2020), Gu et al. (2020a), Chen
et al. (2023), Bryzgalova et al. (2020), Cong et al. (2022), Fan et al. (2022) and Preite
et al. (2022), among others.
It also relates to machine learning methods for analyzing
factor models, including Connor et al. (2012), Fan et al. (2016), Kelly et al. (2020), Lettau
and Pelger (2020), Giglio and Xiu (2021), Giglio et al. (2022), and He et al. (2023) (see
Kelly and Xiu (2023) and Rapach and Zhou (2020) for more complete survey treatments of
these topics). We extend this literature with detailed documentation of the counterintuitive
phenomenon that out-of-sample asset pricing model performance appears to improve with
ever richer model specifications.
An understanding of this surprising empirical phenomenon is only beginning to take
shape.
KMZ theoretically analyze machine learning models for return prediction.
We
extend this work in a number of ways, including reorienting the statistical objective around
minimizing pricing errors and maximizing SDF Sharpe ratios, and by moving from a single
asset to a cross-section of assets.6 Together with Martin and Nagel (2021), Da et al. (2022),
Fan et al. (2022), and KMZ, our paper belongs to an emergent literature analyzing ΓÇ£limits to
learningΓÇ¥ in high-dimensional asset pricing models. Our paper also relates to the theoretical
6From a technical standpoint, we overcome a number of new theoretical hurdles relative to KMZ. In time
series regressions of KMZ, the random matrix behavior of time series signal covariances dictates the market
timing strategies. In the panel problem, behavior is determined not just by time series covariances but also by
the covariance of signals across assets. While standard random matrix theory in KMZ requires dealing with
double limits (number of observations and number of parameters), our analysis requires the development
of a non-trivial theoretical extension to deal with a third limiting dimensionΓÇöthe number of base assets.
This contrasts with recent results of Martin and Nagel (2021), who lack the time dimension and assume
that all stock characteristics are constant. Such an assumption implies that factors (characteristics-managed
portfolios) are, in fact, static portfolios of stocks. In particular, the number of factors in their setting is
always smaller than the number of stocks. Importantly, we also remove the equal ex-ante predictive power
assumption of KMZ and allow for a generic distribution of risk premia across factors.
8


=== PAGE 10 ===
machine learning literature on topics surrounding ΓÇ£double descentΓÇ¥ and ΓÇ£benign overfitΓÇ¥ (e.g.
Spigler et al., 2019; Hastie et al., 2019; Belkin et al., 2020; Bartlett et al., 2020).
A related empirical literature analyzes the association between asset returns and future
macroeconomic conditions. Parker and Julliard (2005) and Croce et al. (2023) show that
stock returns covary with future consumption growth.7 Bryzgalova et al. (Forthcoming) and
Dew-Becker and Giglio (2016) use returns to identify the role of long-lived consumption risks
for pricing assets. Backus et al. (2007) show that equity returns lead GDP growth by a few
quarters. We add to this literature in a number of ways. First, our complex SDF forecasts
future not just consumption and output, but a wide range of macroeconomic activity and
conditions. The macro predictability arising from our model is larger in magnitude than
that of benchmark factor models in the literature. A particularly important new finding is
our complex SDFΓÇÖs strong predictability for macroeconomic uncertainty, giving credence to
popular consumption-based asset pricing models with stochastic macroeconomic volatility
(e.g. Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Campbell et al., 2018). In contrast, none of the standard
benchmarks demonstrate any ability predict macroeconomic uncertainty.8
Through its coupling with the literature on factor pricing models, our work also relates
to the empirical literature surrounding the ΓÇ£factor zooΓÇ¥ and factor replicability, including
Harvey et al. (2016), McLean and Pontiff (2016), Hou et al. (2020), Feng et al. (2020),
Jensen et al. (2023), and Chen and Zimmermann (2021). Our theory helps rationalize the
continued discovery of factors that are unspanned by simpler precedent models. Relatedly,
the demonstrated success of machine learning models in predicting the cross-section of
returns such as Chinco et al. (2019), Han et al. (2019), Freyberger et al. (2020), Rapach
and Zhou (2020), Gu et al. (2020b), Avramov et al. (2023), and Guijarro-Ordonez et al.
(2021), is additional evidence of the virtue of complexity in financial markets research.
The remainder of the paper proceeds by introducing our empirical design in Section 2
7Chernov et al. (2023) demonstrate that currency returns are also predictive of future consumption.
8Relatedly, Bryzgalova et al. (Forthcoming) point out that consumption volatility shocks are conspicuously
absent from their estimation of the risk-return tradeoff.
9


=== PAGE 11 ===
and our empirical findings in Section 3. Section 4 presents our theoretical analysis of large
factor models, and Section 5 concludes.
2
Empirical Framework
We now present the details of our empirical framework for large factor pricing models and
their associated SDF representations.
2.1
Background: Factor Models and the SDF
Hansen and Richard (1987) show that a true SDF, if one exists, is representable as a tradable
portfolio of risky assets as introduced in Equation (1).
A factor pricing model is equivalent to an SDF that is linear in the factors. We can,
therefore, analyze and compare asset pricing factor models as competing SDF specifications.
Motivated by the APT and the principle of parsimony,9 the literature has primarily
investigated (1) with tightly constrained factor specifications of the SDF weight function
w(Zt). A leading example is the Fama and French (1993) model, which restricts Mt+1 to be
a three-parameter model:
wFF
i
= c1MKTi + c2SIZEi + c3VALUEi,
where the weight of asset i in the Fama-French SDF (wFF
i ) depends only on the stockΓÇÖs
weight in the market portfolio (MKTi) and on researcher-dictated functions of the stockΓÇÖs
size and book-to-market ratio (SIZEi and VALUEi).
The Fama-French SDF portfolio can equivalently (and more familiarly) be viewed as a
9See, e.g., Tukey (1961) and Box and Jenkins (1970).
Economic theory also motivates functional
restrictions on the SDF (e.g. Hansen and Singleton, 1982). However, restrictions derived from economic
theory have had limited success to date in pricing cross-sections of assets such as stocks, bonds, and
derivatives. The Fama-French SDF and many other factor models in the literature are motivated by empirical
ΓÇ£anomaliesΓÇ¥ vis-a-vis the CAPM and not by a particular economic theory.
10


=== PAGE 12 ===
linear combination of three factors. The factors are portfolios whose individual stock weights
are given by MKTi, SIZEi, and VALUEi, respectively. The SDF combines these factors with
three parameters, c1, c2, and c3, corresponding to the Sharpe ratio maximizing combination
of the factors. These are the only three parameters that must be estimated in the Fama-
French SDF, resulting in an extraordinarily parsimonious asset pricing model. Thus, the
Fama-French model is a special case of (1) where
w(ZFF
t
) = ZFF
t
╬╗FF.
The conditioning set is ZFF
t
, which has D = 3 columns containing stocksΓÇÖ Fama-French
characteristics, and the weight function is linear in parameters ╬╗FF = (c1, c2, c3)ΓÇ▓. In this
case, the SDF is
M FF
t
= 1 ΓêÆ╬╗FF ΓÇ▓ZFF
t
ΓÇ▓Rt+1,
where we recognize that ZFF
t
ΓÇ▓Rt+1 is a vector of time t returns on the three Fama-French
factors and 1 ΓêÆM FF
t
is their mean-variance efficient combination.
2.2
Designing A Large Factor Model
The Fama-French model achieves its parsimony from rigid assumptions on the SDF weighting
functionΓÇödiscarding all but a few conditioning variables and making detailed choices for the
functional form that maps the selected variables into SDF weights.
The AIPT takes a different approach, founded on the philosophy of machine learning,
and explores the benefits of flexible models that accommodate many potential conditioning
variables and diverse functional forms. In our analysis, Zt is an Nt ├ù D matrix that collects
a large number of D conditioning variables for each risky asset.
We derive a complex
factor pricing model by replacing detailed specification choices with a generic nonparametric
11


=== PAGE 13 ===
approximation to the unknown SDF:
w(Zt) Γëê
P
X
p=1
╬╗pSp(Zt) = St╬╗,
(3)
where each Sp(Zt) is an Nt├ù1 nonlinear basis function of the input data Zt and ╬╗p is a scalar
basis coefficient. This basis expansion explores the space of potential shapes for w(Zt), then
combines these building blocks with coefficients (╬╗p) that best reconstruct the unknown
function w(Zt).
Collecting the P basis terms into an Nt ├ù P matrix of characteristics
St = [S1,t, ..., SP,t], and collecting parameters ╬╗ = [╬╗1, ..., ╬╗P]ΓÇ▓, we arrive at St╬╗ as the
nonparametric approximation to the true SDF weighting function.
The larger is P, the
broader the set of nonlinearities considered, the larger the number of model parameters, and
the more flexible the approximation.
The nonparametric approximation in (3) takes the same basic form as the Fama-French
SDF with St in place of ZFF
t
. The basis terms Sp(Zt) merely transform conditioning variables
into a large number of new nonlinear asset ΓÇ£characteristicsΓÇ¥ analogous to those underpinning
the Fama-French model. Substituting the approximation in (3) into the SDF definition (1),
we arrive at
Mt+1 Γëê1 ΓêÆ╬╗ΓÇ▓SΓÇ▓
tRt+1 = 1 ΓêÆ╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft+1 = 1 ΓêÆRM
t+1.
(4)
In other words, like the Fama-French model, the SDF portfolio (denoted RM
t+1 = ╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft+1) is a
linear combination of factor portfolios,
Ft+1 = SΓÇ▓
tRt+1.
(5)
Each factor Fp,t+1 = Sp(Zt)ΓÇ▓Rt+1 is a characteristic-managed portfolio of risky assets that
uses the nonlinear asset ΓÇ£characteristicΓÇ¥ Sp(Zt) as the vector of portfolio weights, and again ╬╗
12


=== PAGE 14 ===
is the mean-variance efficient combination of factors.10 The difference vis-a-vis Fama-French
(and other parsimonious models) is that the factors in (4) make flexible and nonlinear use
of conditioning data, and there are a large number P of these factors.
2.3
Random Fourier Factors
To operationalize this large factor model approximation of the SDF, our empirical approach
adapts the method of random Fourier features, or RFF (Rahimi and Recht, 2007).11 While
(Rahimi and Recht, 2007) propose RFF for predictive regression, our approach embeds RFF
in an SDF. The nonlinear basis functions in this method are trigonometric transformations
of the original signals Zt:
[S2pΓêÆ1,tS2p,t] ΓêêRNt├ù2 = [sin(╬│Zt╧ëp), cos(╬│Zt╧ëp)]ΓÇ▓ ,
╧ëp Γê╝i.i.d. N(0, I),
p = 1, ..., P/2. (6)
Each RFF basis function forms a random linear combination (╧ëp) of the raw characteristics
Zt, then feeds this through sine and cosine activation functions.12 The transformation is
applied stock-by-stock, converting stock iΓÇÖs characteristics into new nonlinear characteristics
that include not just transformations of each individual characteristic but general multi-way
interactive effects involving all characteristics for stock i.
Upon closer inspection, we see that the SDF in (4) is, in fact, a two-layer neural
network with input parameters given by ╧ëp, output parameters given by ╬╗, and trigonometric
activation neurons (see Figure 1). In a typical neural network, both the input and output
parameters are estimated using computationally costly numerical methods. The fascinating
insight of (Rahimi and Recht, 2007) is that, by using randomization to fix the input
10Because the size of the cross-section varies over time, our empirical analysis in fact scales the factors as
Ft+1 = N ΓêÆ1/2
t
SΓÇ▓
tRt+1 to maintain a relatively consistent scale of factor returns over time.
11In Section 3.8 we demonstrate the robustness of our findings to other complex model specifications.
12The parameter ╬│ controls the Gaussian kernel bandwidth in generating random Fourier features.
Following Kelly et al. (2022), we randomly chose ╬│ from the grid [0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0] for each ╧ëi that
we generate. This embeds varying degrees of nonlinearity in the generated feature set St.
13


=== PAGE 15 ===
wi,t=SΓÇ▓
i,t╬╗
Si,t=
nh
sin(╬│ZΓÇ▓
i,t╧ëp), cos(╬│ZΓÇ▓
i,t╧ëp)
ioP
p=1
Zi,t
Figure 1: Neural Network Representation of Random Fourier Factors
Note. Illustration of nonlinear mapping from stock iΓÇÖs characteristics Zi,t into hidden layer neurons Si,t
and then into the conditional SDF weight wi,t during the construction of random Fourier factors.
parameters and only estimating the output parameters, random features regression can build
nonparametric approximations in a computationally efficient manner.13
Building on this
insight, our SDF model is estimable in closed form using only least squares regression (as
discussed below).
RFF is an ideal tool for our analysis because, from a fixed input data set Zt we can create
asset pricing models with any desired factor dimension, P. For a low-dimensional model of,
say, P = 2, one generates a single pair of RFFs. For a high-dimensional model of, say,
P = 10,000, one can instead draw many random weight vectors ╧ëp, p = 1, ..., 5,000. This
gives us the ability to evaluate how asset pricing models are impacted by varying the number
of factors while holding the set of conditioning variables fixed. It is important to emphasize
that in our analysis, factor proliferation arises not from expanding the set of input data Zt
(which may or may not be low-dimensional) but instead from generating many nonlinear
basis transformations of Zt.
2.4
Estimator
The SDF coefficient vector ╬╗ represents the mean-variance efficient portfolio of factors. Note
that the factor representation of the conditional SDF in essence produces an equivalent
unconditional SDF. This allows us to estimate ╬╗ as the sample Markowitz portfolio of factors:
13Indeed, RFF is a special case of kernel regression. For applications of kernel regression in asset pricing
settings, see Kozak (2020) and Kelly et al. (2024a).
14


=== PAGE 16 ===
arg max
╬╗

╦åE[╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft] ΓêÆ1
2
╦åE

(╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft)2
= ╦åE[FtF ΓÇ▓
t]ΓêÆ1 ╦åE[Ft]
(7)
where ╦åE denotes the training sample mean. We denote the corresponding estimated SDF
and SDF portfolio as
╦å
Mt = 1 ΓêÆ╦åRM
t
and
╦åRM
t
= ╦å╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft.
(8)
The AIPT explores large factor models in which the dimension of ╬╗ may exceed the
number of time series observations, i.e., P > T. In this case, ╦åE[FtF ΓÇ▓
t]ΓêÆ1 is rank-deficient,
which we resolve by introducing a ridge penalty in the Markowitz problem:
╦å╬╗(z) = arg max
╬╗

╦åE[╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft] ΓêÆ1
2
╦åE

(╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft)2
ΓêÆz╬╗ΓÇ▓╬╗

=

zI + ╦åE[FtF ΓÇ▓
t]
ΓêÆ1 ╦åE[Ft]
(9)
where z is the ridge parameter.
Kozak et al. (2020) point out that we can also interpret ╦å╬╗(z) in terms of ΓÇ£pricing errors.ΓÇ¥
Since the factors Ft are tradable assets, the true SDF Mt prices these factors with zero error
due to the marginal investorΓÇÖs first-order optimality condition:
E[MtFt] = 0.
(10)
Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) suggest a statistic for comparing the efficacy of SDF
models in terms of their pricing error magnitudes. For a candidate SDF ╦£
Mt, The Hansen-
Jagannathan distance (HJD) is a weighted sum of squared pricing errors for the set of test
15


=== PAGE 17 ===
assets Ft:14
DHJ = E[ ╦£
MtFt]ΓÇ▓E[FtF ΓÇ▓
t]ΓêÆ1E[ ╦£
MtFt].
(11)
Substituting the SDF approximation model (4) for ╦£
M in the HJD and adding a ridge penalty
to handle rank deficiency when P > T, we have
╦å╬╗(z) = arg min
╬╗
n
╦åE[(1 ΓêÆ╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft)Ft]ΓÇ▓ ╦åE[FtF ΓÇ▓
t]ΓêÆ1 ╦åE[(1 ΓêÆ╬╗ΓÇ▓Ft)Ft] + z╬╗ΓÇ▓╬╗
o
.
(12)
In other words, ╦å╬╗(z) is also the regularized SDF estimator that minimizes pricing error (we
discuss HJD in further detail in Section 2.6).
2.5
Data and Training
To make the conclusions from this analysis as easy to digest as possible, we perform our
analysis in a conventional setting with conventional data.
We use a comprehensive and
standardized sample of monthly US stock returns and 153 stock characteristics from 1963 to
2023, compiled by Jensen et al. (2023) (JKP henceforth).15 As in JKP, our universe includes
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ securities with CRSP share code 10, 11, or 12, excluding ΓÇ£nanoΓÇ¥
stocks (i.e., stocks with market capitalization below the first percentile of NYSE stocks).
Some of the JKP characteristics have low coverage, especially in the early parts of the
sample. To ensure that characteristic composition is fairly homogeneous over time and to
avoid purging a large number of stock-month observations due to missing data, we reduce
the 153 characteristics to a smaller set of D = 130 characteristics with the fewest missing
values. We drop stock-month observations for which more than 30% of the 130 characteristic
values are missing and use Nt to denote the number of the remaining stock observations at
time t. Next, we cross-sectionally rank-standardize each characteristic and map it to the
14We discuss some attractive properties of the HJD in the following sections.
15To access the stock-level characteristic data and associated documentation, refer to jkpfactors.com.
16


=== PAGE 18 ===
[ΓêÆ0.5, 0.5] interval, following Gu et al. (2020b). Ultimately, we obtain an Nt ├ù D matrix of
conditioning characteristics Zt in each month.
In our empirical analyses, we study SDF performance as we vary two aspects of the model:
the number of factors P and ridge penalty z. For each model of a given size and shrinkage,
we conduct a rolling out-of-sample model performance analysis. Starting in January 1993, in
each month t, we use the most recent 360 months of data to estimate the ridge SDF parameter
in (9).16 We then track the out-of-sample SDF portfolio return in the subsequent month.
From the sequence of monthly out-of-sample SDF realizations, we calculate out-of-sample
SDF performance metrics.
2.6
Performance Metrics
We evaluate our SDF models with two standard out-of-sample performance metrics. A true
SDF is the mean-variance efficient portfolio of risky assets. Thus, our first performance
metric is the SDF portfolio Sharpe ratio. For a candidate SDF ╦£
Mt = 1ΓêÆ╦£RM
t , the annualized
out-of-sample Sharpe ratio is
c
SR =
ΓêÜ
12
╦åEOS[ ╦£RM
t ]
╦å╧âOS( ╦£RM
t )
where ╦åEOS and ╦å╧âOS denote sample average and standard deviation among the TOS out-of-
sample observations (to differentiate versus the notation ╦åE and T used for training samples).
Since the SDF is constructed from excess returns on risky assets, the numerator need not be
adjusted for the risk-free rate.
Our second performance metric is the pricing error for a large set of test assets. The test
assets in our main analysis are the 153 JKP anomaly factors constructed by those authors
16The stochastic nature of RFF means that there is inherent variability in the estimated SDF model when
P is small. To mitigate this variability, we repeat the RFF-based estimation 20 times with different random
seeds and report average performance metrics across seeds. This has little qualitative effect on the plots
shown. See KMZ for further discussion of this point.
17


=== PAGE 19 ===
and downloadable at jkpfactors.com (robustness analyses report pricing errors for other
test asset sets as well). To aggregate test asset pricing errors into a single metric, we calculate
the normalized sum of squared pricing errors according to the Hansen-Jagannathan distance
(HJD) referenced in Section 2.4. For a set of test asset returns RT
t , the out-of-sample HJD
is
╦åDHJ = ╦åEOS
h
╦£
MtRT
t
iΓÇ▓ ╦åEOS
h
RT
t RT
t
ΓÇ▓i+ ╦åEOS
h
╦£
MtRT
t
i
,
(13)
where + is the Moore-Penrose quasi-inverse (necessary due to the degeneracy of ╦åEOS[RT
t RT
t
ΓÇ▓]
when P > TOS).
The HJD has a number of attractive model comparison properties.17 It averages pricing
errors among test assets using a common weighting matrix for all candidate models of
Mt. This is important because it puts all models on equal footing for comparison, unlike
other alpha or GMM-based comparisons. The weighting matrix is economically motivated
since it gives the HJD a clear interpretation as the pricing error of the portfolio of test
assets that is most mispriced by each model. Furthermore, the HJD is scale invariant.18
While typically used for in-sample comparison, the HJD easily generalizes for out-of-sample
evaluation because it avoids the need to estimate out-of-sample time series alphas and betas
for each test asset. Finally, because our theoretical derivations explicitly characterize the
expected out-of-sample HJD for complex SDF models, the empirical HJD can be directly
compared to theoretical predictions.
17In addition to Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), the literature including Kan and Robotti (2009), Chen
and Ludvigson (2009), and Kelly and Xiu (2023) further advocates HJD as a pricing error metric.
18Differences in volatilities among factors can skew test statistics like average absolute alpha or the GRS
statistic, and as a result, the volatility scaling choice for test assets can lead to different conclusions. HJD
is invariant to changes in test asset volatility.
18


=== PAGE 20 ===
2.7
Benchmark Models
We provide reference points for our analysis by comparing large factor model performance
to five benchmark factor pricing models in the literature:19
FF6: This is a six-factor model that includes the five factors of Fama and French (2015) plus
their UMD momentum.
SY: This is a four-factor model that includes the ΓÇ£mispricingΓÇ¥ factors of Stambaugh and
Yuan (2017).
HXZ: This is a five-factor model that includes the q-factor model specification of Hou et al.
(2015) augmented to include the expected growth factor of Hou et al. (2021).
DHS: This is a three-factor model that includes the long-horizon and short-horizon behavioral
factors of Daniel et al. (2020).
BS: This is a composite model that selects factors from the literature based on the Bayesian
methodology of Barillas and Shanken (2018). Its six factors include the market factor,
the investment and profitability factors from Hou et al. (2015), the size and momentum
factors from Fama and French (2015), and the value factor (HMLm) from Asness et al.
(2013).
To compare models, we use the SDF corresponding to each of these factor pricing models,
which requires estimating the Markowitz portfolio of factors in each model. We do this in
rolling 360-month training windows and track benchmark performance out-of-sample. In
other words, we use the same training/evaluation design for the benchmarks that we use for
our large factor pricing models.20
19All benchmark factor data are conveniently available from the respective authorsΓÇÖ websites.
20When building the Markowitz portfolio for each benchmark model, we do not use ridge shrinkage because
the number of assets is far smaller than the number of time series observations. Even with infeasible (ex-
post optimal) ridge shrinkage, we find the out-of-sample SDF performance of benchmark models changes
negligibly.
19

Total pages: 172
